I don't use it in conversation.
Okay.
And you've moved to your operation to England within the last year.
Well, yeah, I mean, we've been playing this for a long time.
My wife's English, and she came
who lived in New York about 10 years ago and hated everything together.
And I got sick of New York, too.
So we decided about five years ago to pull up and leave as soon as we could.
So it's more of a personal, domestic reason, and nothing to do, not so much... It was not... No.
Although...
Oddly enough, moving the business has been the easiest part of coming.
And when we sold our apartment there, we already rented this place for a long time.
And she had rented it before we were there.
And we had a bit of luck, because this whole area of North London used to be out by even top.
and that's why all the names around here have to be like Don's Road and Avenue and so.
Anyway, Eton owned all these houses and they used to just rent them out to people and gradually they came getting out of the property business so they got a notice in the mail one day that this house had been sold to the
what sounded like a somewhat shady property development called Tickback.
Well, we didn't like the idea that Tickback was going to be our new landlord.
And we discovered that we had the right, with other certain tenants in the building, to preempt the story.
So we wound up buying the whole house.
back to Vicky's mother in the downstairs thing.
We could control that flat.
We had this one upstairs with a short-term tenant, and on the top floor was another American who teaches violin.
So with him, we bought the whole house for next semester.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Congratulations.
So we came here, I think, about 10 months ago.
sold one downstairs and relocated, my mother-in-law, for more than the whole house.
So we're now sitting with these two.
Most of our stuff is still in storage.
And what I've done is convert that last day, which is not my brother, but on the family of the room.
They're here, though, in London?
They're here.
I mean, I haven't seen them for a year and a half.
Really?
So, obviously, that's general stuff.
There's no— I've moved all the better, but I'm a bit of a reference line.
working out of this room.
Well, the office was closed, paper, maybe not.
It's been a long time.
Yeah, well, here you are.
And so, the last time that we moved out for a few years, and then I keep going up with black hair.
We just bought this.
You bought that?
Yeah.
I love that.
Wow.
You got my wife's attention on that.
That's where it is right now.
Wow.
Well, I could do it.
It's just not such.
Wow.
This is country.
No, I'm going to
move everything down there.
London will just be appeared up here.
In fact, part of the reason we chose this house is that's the 10s actually.
We have 200 yards from each on the page.
It looks like a pretty nice shape, too.
It doesn't look like we have to do much.
It needs a lot of cosmetic stuff.
It doesn't need too much.
Unfortunately,
is double glazed windows, which we've got to take out.
But this section, there's sort of three rooms here.
They're pretty big, actually.
That'll become the book rooms.
How old is it?
I think basically the earliest parts of it are the mid-18th century, although this village obviously goes back much earlier.
And I know that
Edward the Confessor stayed next door.
There's a wonderful Anglo-Norman church sitting next, almost next door.
So I'll become a country scribe shortly.
That would be fairly weird, I guess.
Most of your book business must be, I mean, obviously people don't come to see the material.
Yeah, probably.
I mean, they don't actually come here much either, so it doesn't really matter.
It's not that much of a change because, in fact, not that many people came to the office and, I mean, people did come.
But even in the middle of New York, we've got one or two people a day, I suppose, and most of those were just either chums or a waste of time.
When we chatted the other day, we said, well, come on over, I'll tell you what I'm up to.
Well, I mean, to be honest, when we moved here, I wasn't quite sure how it was going to work.
I mean, the business had sort of established a pattern in New York.
that's going to change in some ways, but it doesn't seem to be changing all that much.
In fact, what I think will happen is that the number of customers will be smaller, and I'll deal with them in a somewhat more intense way.
Could you increase it a little bit?
I mean, you've been there, you know, we went to Vegas this morning, and we just left quarters.
What they do is,
Well, it isn't really that different actually.
They just do it with a lot more people.
It's a matter of temperament in a way, whether you like to do it yourself or whether you like to be part of a big group.
But we sell the same kind of books to the same customers.
I know their customers, and they know mine more or less.
I mean, obviously they cover more areas if they have more people.
But, I mean, in a way you could say this business is like one of Klerich's sections.
You know, they have a literature department, an early book department, a travel department, an economics department, an Arabic department, whatever.
I mean, I sort of function as one of their departments, but I have a little more freedom to hop about from subject to subject, whereas their departments are fairly self-contained and compete with one another, I think.
say to yourself a specialty bookseller?
Not a specialty bookseller, but there are some biases just based on my background.
I mean, it's more literary than it is science and medicine.
It's more
It's probably more academically oriented than some booksellers would be now.
I came along early enough so that I dealt with the library market more than the younger booksellers.
And very interesting, by the way, that is a continuation of this book.
Just because we never formally discussed it, can you just give me a brief background, biography?
I went to Harvard, I don't know, class of 59.
I was a math banker originally.
But after three years, I could have fulfilled the requirements for my BA and decided that I wasn't going to be a mathematician.
So I switched to English.
and mostly did English courses my senior year.
I stayed on it for graduate school.
At Harvard, at Harvard.
That's what I did in those days, to stay on the army.
I went for the same period.
Well, you must know how old you are.
I'm 50.
Fishing 54.
I wound up a little older than you, but didn't know what I needed.
I went to graduate at 65.
I mean, in those days, going to graduate school was almost automatic.
It brought you two more years.
Well, it brought you as many years as you wanted.
I mean, technically then, you could say a student, then there came a point where you had to be married.
That came before.
Yeah, that was about 61.
And you had to have a kid.
I got married at that point.
You didn't need a kid until
about 65.
That's right, which is when I graduated.
Yes.
Well, I was, what happened was I did a year of grad in school, and I took a year off and sort of traveled, I spent most of it in Paris, and then traveling to Paris for a few months.
I did that because I was the last year, at that point, my draft board was in Chicago, and that's where my parents were at that time.
At that point,
They were only drafting if you were over 23, from 23 to 26.
And I was 22, so I knew I could drop the deferment for a year and then take it back.
So I took a year off, and then I came back to graduate school, picked up my deferment, got married, which sort of helped continue the deferment.
And so I was at graduate school over five years.
I had almost gotten my PhD, but I took a course in the Houghton Library in the Arbor City, exactly the same as Arthur at Corrigan.
We were talking to him right now.
Yeah.
Well, he's my classmate.
I didn't know that.
I bet I didn't know.
I didn't tell him we were coming here.
That's probably just as well as Mr.
even though we were very close chums.
And he and I got divorced at almost exactly the same time, although happily we can cause each other's divorce instead.
About six months after, we were married.
So, Arthur and I, we get along on that, but we're not as chummy as we used to be.
But our backgrounds are very similar in the bookings.
I mean, in fact, he was also a graduate.
He went on, he did get his Ph.D.
in with a professor at Boston University for a while.
I think Uncle Harry was quite a famous Harvard English professor.
He took this course from Bill Jackson.
He did say Bill Jackson was his mentor.
That's right.
I mean, you know about Jackson.
Oh, like you said.
Yeah, and he wrote the four-pound catalogs.
I mean, he was a fairly amazing bookman of the old school, really.
If he hadn't been American, he would have been an English-haristic, actually.
He was at that time.
In fact, he kind of hobbobbed the aristocracy anyway.
and became fascinated by it.
I mean, I've never touched any old books before.
I knew nothing about what kind of work.
So you credit this course that you took?
Yeah, Arthur took the course, because we were very close friends, and he was talking about it all the time.
And I thought, that sounds interesting.
And this was a course that was part of the graduate school curriculum.
So I took the course the next year.
with a third friend who we put up a silent partner late in 1961.
Well, I put up $1,000.
The other friend put up $1,000.
Arthur, who never had any money at that time, but had already bought a few books one way or another.
He put up $1,000 worth of books.
And together, we started Syntomies.
So, we did, how did it work?
We formed a business, chose a name for it.
And how did you think we chose a judge, Billy?
Jimenez is actually the head name.
the man who set the crossword puzzles in the London Observer, and I was sort of a crossword puzzle fan.
You know, these really difficult English crossword puzzles, and they're not like the New York Times.
I mean, I still do.
You can see them lying around here.
I mean, you know, you have to,
This is the Sunday Observer puzzle.
The reason you see it, it's now set by a man named Azad.
He's the successor because Jimenez died.
The first person who did the puzzle called himself Torquemada because the puzzles were so fiendishly difficult.
He took a name from the Spanish Inquisition.
When he died,
His successor picked another name from the Spanish Inquisition, which was Cardinal Jiménez.
And then when Jiménez, as they called in England, died, his successor just picked the name A-Z-A-T-Z.
That was cool.
In fact, when?
It was about 19...
early 1970s, when my office in New York, which was around 85th Street, the doorbell rang, and there was an Englishman there.
He said, he just wanted to know why there was a book company called Ximenez.
So I was startled by that.
I told him.
He said, oh, well, that's interesting, because I am Azay, the successor to Ximenez, and it was this man at my door.
Right.
I mean, he didn't care about old books particularly, but he just saw it in the phone book, I guess.
And so he handed me a book of his puzzles and went away.
And I keep meaning to sort of look him up here again.
Anyway, we gave, you know, we chose the business end just sort of as a joke because it wasn't very serious.
And we started buying books.
good deeds.
Also, Jackson, I think, sort of liked the notion that some of his students were actually trading at books.
He was kind of a bookseller, Monquet himself.
He knew a lot of his course not only had to do with what the books were, but how much they were worth and where you got them, and
collecting world generally, and that was the sort of thing that appealed to me.
Was it a bibliography course?
It was technically a bibliography course.
I mean, it was the most genteel course I ever took.
It was wonderful.
It met once a week on Wednesday afternoons.
You had tea in the Keats room, and you sort of passed around Shakespeare quarters and things like that, while Jackson used to talk about
where they came from, how much they were worth, who bought them, who sold them, and things like that.
And plus all the technical details of bibliography, but I confess at that point, I think the kind of treasure hunt side of it appeared to me more than anything.
To be honest, I wasn't that keen at a graduate
I mean, I was good enough at it.
But the notion of becoming an English professor, there was no alternative, you know, by the that or Vietnam.
And suddenly this presented itself as an alternative.
I spent most of my time in those, as my chief interests, was in playing poker, going to the racetrack, various forms of gambling, actually.
And
I think, although I didn't quite realize it at the time, that this business turned into a kind of respectable form of playing poker or going to the racetrack.
I mean, it is a kind of gambling business.
And in fact, ever since I've been doing this full time, my car flying and so on has more or less vanished business.
And Arthur wasn't quite as involved in that, but he was a games-playing person, too.
He was a chess player, and we had a lot of things in common like that.
So we ran it together for about three years, along with his talent partner.
Was he down in New York now?
No, it was in Cambridge.
Yeah, Cambridge.
We issued three catalogues together.
And then I decided that I wanted to do this full-time.
So I chucked my thesis, which was sort of halfway done, into the wastebasket, and brought out Arthur and the other guy, I think for $3,000.
I mean, some fairly trivial stuff.
So they made a profit.
They made a profit.
Well, that was about all I had, anyway.
So there wasn't much choice.
And all of the books at that point were basically in that little glass bookcase.
You still have it?
It's still there.
Yeah, that bookcase was bought in Cambridge for $25 at a local audience there.
I mean, not a great bookcase, but it was much more than that.
Yeah.
In fact, I got married by then, so we decided the summer of 65, we picked up and moved to New York.
Serendipitously, I had inherited $10,000 from my grandmother who died, so I had some working capital.
Just what you needed in those days wasn't very much.
Real estate in Manhattan was not that expensive.
I mean, it amazes me now.
When we moved to New York, our first apartment was, we chose between two on the Upper West.
One of them cost $110 a month, and one cost $130 a month, and we decided to go for the cheaper one.
And my office, little office on 45th Street, a block away from the old set of Gables, cost me $100 a month.
I think I made it.
And I'm just old enough.
You haven't gotten yours yet, but you will in a few years.
You get your Social Security history as you approach your 60s.
Mine just arrived the other day, which shows my earnings in 1965.
In the first year I earned any money, I think my tax return was $535.
So it still was running through the $10,000 I even earned.
And in 66, I think I made $6,000.
Every year after that, you can't tell because I hit the Social Security threshold, so they just tell you that amount if you're in.
So we opened the business in the fall of 65.
And just about that time, it was, it must have been
66 already, when they changed the draft rule again, you had to have a kid.
My wife, after a long struggle, was pregnant.
And I received my notice from my draft board to report for a physical about two days after we learned she was pregnant.
So I knew that I wasn't going to be drafted, and
At the same time, I still had to go to the physical, down in the steps of Lower New York, because it was too hard to cancel it.
So five o'clock in the morning, I drifted down to the ludicrous physical exam, at which it turned out...
Well, there was a very funny moment, actually.
It was one of these things where you're with 500 other young men.
Most of them in those days actually were Puerto Rican.
And they'd give you an eye test.
They'd say, look in there and read the third line.
And it was this sort of microscope kind of eye tester.
And I'd look in, and I said, I can't see anything.
It was five in the morning.
So they said, okay, and they're still in the form you were carrying around.
I noticed it said both 2020 and both.
After about an hour, I'd gotten to the point where there's a famous moment in all Army physicals where they examine the recruits' backsides.
That's interesting.
Yeah, there are 200 naked guys, and you're all sort of leaning over.
And the doctors are walking down the aisle, and they go, okay, okay, okay.
Well, I was right at the end of the line, and the team of Army doctors got to me, and they said, okay, and they walked.
And suddenly one of them said, wait a minute.
You.
I said, what?
I said, you've got a pyelonoidal cyst.
I said, I know, so what?
You're kidding.
I had one too.
They took me.
I had one.
Unbelievable.
Really?
Yeah.
Well, that was the end of my physical.
They sent me away, and they made me 4F.
And a polynatal cyst.
Yeah, well, yeah.
One in ten people have it.
So you know what I'm talking about.
I had one.
I had it removed in the Navy.
I mean, on my ship, they took it out.
Really?
Yeah.
See, I always refused to have mine removed.
I had a...
I had an uncle, who's a great uncle, who always wanted to remove it.
He said, you know, you should have that operate on it.
He was a surgeon.
He loved operating on anything that moved.
I said, well, you know, what harm does it do?
In fact, the only disadvantage of the pilonodal cystic, it got inflamed if you rode around in a jeep a long time, you know.
Well, you grow out of it anyway.
I mean, it hasn't bothered me since my late 20s.
Mine was pretty tough.
I used to bleed a lot.
Yeah, occasionally.
I mean, if you did too much bike riding or something.
When you're in your 20s, we could get sore sitting in lectures.
It was kind of uncomfortable.
It wasn't serious enough.
Anyway, we had a physician on our ship who was dying to do a surgery.
I had mine done over in the Tonkin Gulf, a guy that were all healthy people.
He was desperate to do surgery.
But I thought those—well, in the earlier days, the operation they used in the Army didn't work.
It grew back.
Wonderful.
I had mine 31 years ago.
I had never returned.
Yeah, but you see, it was a waste of time because mine hasn't bothered me in 30 years.
He showed me, you know, it was huge when he took that.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
But it kind of, as you get older, sort of,
It shrivels away, and anyway it's in your genes, and you pass it on.
Well, I guess the mother, I think it comes, I mean my mother, I don't know.
It comes through the mother.
I don't know if that's true, but that probably had a couple of cysts in various places, and I was just falling out of them.
Anyway, let's get away from it.
Here we go.
It was sort of ironic to me, because
If they said then I was 4F, then all this business about staying in graduate school, et cetera, et cetera, getting married— Irrelevant.
All irrelevant, I could have done anything.
But they might not have seen it the first time, too.
He knows, yeah, exactly.
I mean, I said— They took me, I can tell you what they called me.
You were just unlawful.
That's the way it called me.
You were lucky they turned around.
But it wouldn't have mattered then.
I didn't care.
Anyway, that was the end.
They sent me away halfway through the physical.
I never finished it.
So then you went and became a determined bookseller.
Yeah, at that point I was a bookseller.
Well, what I knew because of where I'd gotten my training was the first thing I knew was the library market.
Harvard was our first customer because we used to buy
We used to trade stuff with Jackson.
You know, we'd find things locally, look them up in the Harvard catalogs and so on, because we didn't have any reference library.
If we'd find out that they didn't have anything, he would take us down to the duplicate room and swap duplicates with us.
In fact, I mean, the first significant book we ever handled, really, was the first edition of Paradise Lost, in my opinion.
which we traded to him for some, a couple of other early English sermons.
To Jackson?
To Jackson.
He didn't have a Faraday's Lot?
He had a duplicate.
We found, or actually it was Arthur who found them, actually, sort of across the street at one of the old secondhand bookstores there, a little pile of early English sermons.
In Cambridge?
In Cambridge.
And,
Arthur bought them for a dollar each.
I think there were 11 of them.
So we looked them up and found out Harvard didn't have some of them, so we traded something like four sermons for five sermons for a first edition of Paradise Lost, which we then sold.
I think it was our first sale to the library.
We sold to Penn State.
I don't know how we knew that they didn't have one, but
And Charlie Mann, the librarian there, who's still the librarian, bought it from us for, I think it was $250.
Wow.
That's been crazy.
That was good profit.
Well, that was the kind of thing that appealed to me.
I thought, this was fun.
And in a sense, I've always felt that there's at least a certain kind of bookseller.
a key ingredient to doing this is you have to like the idea of finding something for a dollar and selling it for a thousand.
I mean, if that's not fun, you're in the wrong business.
I mean, admittedly, there are booksellers, I suppose, who don't care about that, but many of us do.
I mean, that's one of the kicks you get out of it.
You're constantly on this sort of treasure hunt, and it still happens.
I mean, part of the fun of it, I still feel,
go to a book fair or whatever, find something for 20 pounds that I can sell for 500 pounds.
Now, do you think that you know somebody's interested or do you just recognize immediately?
I mean, I suppose it would be unfair to say I don't know that anybody's interested in it, but that's not really the way.
I don't buy books for specific people.
I kind of buy a kind of book that interests me
And therefore, over the years, I have customers who are going to be interested in it.
But, you know, many times I'll buy it and then sit down and think, oh, well, I might as well offer it to so-and-so.
But that's sort of a secondary consideration.
I've bought it already.
I was up in Toronto a couple weeks ago, and Thomas Fisher and we were talking to Richard.
Right, and the captain's group up there.
And he mentioned that...
York University, where it was founded in the 60s, which is up in Toronto.
York University.
They didn't have any books at all.
So as he told me, a core collection, they went to Star Bookstore, bought out all of their books, and then went to a place in Montreal, Ducharme, I guess, and borrowed all of their books to get some French claim.
And that was basically a core thing.
Well, that was one thing, and if you were in the business in this,
50s and 60s, it made it a lot easier to get started because it was a period of huge expansion of all these North American libraries, and they had more money than cents, and big budgets being allocated to library development because they thought then that in order to be a respectable school, you had to have a respectable library.
So they had...
more than enough money to buy all the imprint things they wanted.
So they used the leftover to buy retrospectively, which often included antiquarian books.
Not just out-of-print books, but old books.
And so in those days, if you sent out a catalog, you would often get these rather astonishing orders from long days that I remember in the
I thought it was in on the tail end of that.
I said, it was really big in the 50s when libraries would walk in and buy your whole stock.
They lived there.
It was possible, yeah.
But I remember early catalogs I sent out to Newark.
You got orders from places like the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
You had 350 items in a catalog, and they'd order everything under $100, which was a lot of items in those days.
You could buy a lot of good books for under $100.
Did they get your first catalog next time out, probably?
Well, they didn't actually.
They'd ordered three months late, which was great.
You know, your customers you knew would get first crack, and then they'd come along and sweep up everything else.
They'd order 175 items or anything like that.
It wasn't a lot of money or anything, and it was already fading in the late 60s.
But in those days, I dealt with lots and lots of libraries.
And the history of the business has been that those numbers have been gradually shrinking until
I mean, now, I've cut them all off the mailing list, practically.
I mean, I probably deal with, in a serious way, with 20 now.
It's down to Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Folger, Chicago, Toronto.
I mean, the big ones.
The ones who are still acquiring rare things.
Yeah.
I mean, I suppose some of them may be still acquiring bits here and there on special subjects, or they may have special funds.
I mean, you know, we may sell to the art smaller library.
A few may have hung on for one reason or another.
But it's certainly not the same kind of business as it was then.
So a young bookseller getting into the market now
He's not going to be focusing on libraries so much anymore because that won't be the center of the business.
Even if the money is available, those libraries are going to be buying from the older, more established dealers like me or Quaritch or whatever, and it would be hard to break into them.
They just don't have the funds to buy everything they want.
Do you think that's still a case?
Not in the same way as it used to be.
And I think that most, I would guess that most university administrators are faced with mounting budgets, and I mean, universities are expensive places to run, are reluctant to allocate
masses of money to the libraries anymore the way they used to.
Certainly not in antiquarian books, because they can see the future is coming.
You can't stop it.
Libraries aren't going to be used the same way they used to be.
They aren't even called the libraries anymore, which is really depressing.
I don't find it depressing.
We're at a period of huge change now, obviously, with the electronic world upon us.
I think we're at a moment now that is not entirely dissimilar to the moment in the middle of the 15th century when printing was invented.
I'm sure there were people like us sitting around saying, what are these inventories?
new things.
It's a movable type.
It's vulgar.
We like our nice old libraries with beautiful illuminated manuscripts in them.
This new stuff is no good.
And yet, 50 years later, the role of manuscripts was... You couldn't stop it now.
And the nature of a library changed quite dramatically.
print allowed libraries to expand dramatically.
Electronics is obviously going to shrink.
There's not going to be, I don't believe in a hundred years there's going to be a physical library except as a museum.
You won't have to go to a library to get information.
We can do that now from our homes.
Yeah, you already can, but it's chaotic now, right?
I mean, you have to know how to hunt the internet or whatever.
But I can't believe that books aren't going to be sort of scanned in.
They'll be huge databases.
If a book comes, a scholarly work comes out, you're not going to have to go into the British Library and sit in the reading room to look at it.
That's ridiculous.
Stanford University Press is actually publishing some of his
on life.
They aren't even going into print.
Well, it's idiotic to print a monograph that 20 people really are going to need.
And it will cost $500 and is basically obsolete the day it comes out.
I mean, don't invest your money in companies printing scholarly journals.
I mean, it's crazy.
I mean, that's a scam that won't exist anymore.
And huge amounts of library money go on those things.
I think that this is going to be a bonanza for universities and that the cost of running a library should be, many of the costs should be eliminated.
It just won't be necessary.
How do you feel about the deaccession of books, physical books?
Personally, I don't have a purist attitude.
I mean, I like the scholarly side of the book world.
I mean, that's my background.
It does interest me.
I hope to know that.
But I also like the sentimental side of collecting.
Collecting is not just a scholarly activity.
There's something about the feel of a book.
Just having a first edition in your hands doesn't mean that
the scholarly life.
So it's nice to have books back in circulation when it allows people to collect them again.
I don't know how much this is going to happen, but I wouldn't be surprised if over the next century there's quite a lot of deacquisition.
I mean, all those books I sold to Stonebrook 30 years ago, what do you think they're doing there?
Nothing, right?
Do you think anyone's using them?
in a meaningful way.
Well, if nobody's using them today, does that mean they should get rid of them?
Why not?
I mean, it's a lot easier to travel around now, too, than forgetting the electronic business.
I mean, if you want to see a copy of a book and there's one at Harvard or something, if you actually have to see it physically, as opposed to just reading the text or having it scanned into a database,
Then you can travel to see it.
It's about the heart that you used to travel.
Where were you yesterday?
You were in North America.
When I was a kid, to get here you got on a boat.
You were just beginning to fly, and then my first two trips to Europe were by phone.
It took six days to go see a book.
It was on the other side of the earth.
I mean, it's not going to matter.
And I don't believe that places like Stony Brook will keep stuff like that, except out of inertia, because they're too stupid to focus on it.
When I started in the business, I used to come to England and buy trips every nine months or so.
I had a sort of regular pattern.
I would fly to Scotland, actually, rent a car up in the airport outside of Glasgow, Prestwick, drive into Edinburgh and around there hunting for books, and gradually work my way down to London.
It was sort of a three-week routine.
And that's where a lot of my stock would come from.
In the course of those checks, I would buy
Victorian novels, because it was one of the areas that I was sort of interested in.
These nice three-decker novels that are sort of attractive.
And I could find in a three-week trip, 60, 80, 100 of them.
My limit in those days for a routine novel was six pounds.
I didn't notice as much as I would spend, unless it was somebody paying for Thomas Hardy or George Eliot.
But I would buy all kinds of them in obscure titles, and I could find them.
I'd get them back to New York, and my best customer for them was the University of South Carolina.
I would make a list of them.
They used to cost $25, $30, that kind of range.
I'd send them down a list, and they would buy all the ones they didn't have, which was a fairly healthy percentage of them.
I don't know how many years I did that, but I probably spent them 500 to 1,000 three-deckers.
Well, the University of South Carolina doesn't buy three-deckers anymore.
They haven't done so for 25 years.
They must have them now.
Now the average three-decker of that store is worth a couple hundred pounds, I suppose.
Nobody's looking at them at the University of South Carolina.
They have minor Victorian novels.
took it upon himself to buy Victorian novels.
I mean, you know, you have to buy something.
They had to use up their budgets.
I can't, I don't think it was necessarily anybody doing anything with a great plan or for a very sensible reason.
Maybe it was his hobby.
I don't know.
Expressing his collections in the university.
But those, if I go on a similar three-week trip now, I'm not going to see any three-day novels.
They're off the market.
They're gone.
There are a few around if you go into a jar and dice or something.
I have some.
They still come up occasionally, but not in any quantity.
Well, is there a demand for them among collectors?
Yeah.
There's still a demand.
They're expensive now.
But for a young collector starting out, if he comes in, I'm not going to tell him, why don't you make a comprehensive collection of Victorian three-deckers?
Where are they going to find them?
He could still collect them, but now it's like collecting Elizabethan plays.
You mentioned that you're not going to advise a young collector to do this or that.
Do you work in that area?
Do you develop collections with individuals?
It's sort of a two-sided business for me.
It has been always.
One is my dealing with the university life.
And I have done quite closely with a fair number of them.
And the other side of the business is dealing with private collectors.
And they buy a different kind of book, really.
And you can't sell a Jane Austen first edition to a university library, because they have it.
And Harvard doesn't need a Jane Austen first edition.
That doesn't mean I don't like Jane Austen.
So if I'm going to buy that, that's a different kind of business.
I have to sell it to a collector, or another dealer who's going to sell it to a collector.
But it's essentially aimed at a private collector's world.
Now, there are private collectors who are sophisticated enough or specialized enough that they may share some of the characteristics of a research line.
quite scholarly collectors.
They're somewhere in the middle, but many collectors collect famous books, or books they like, or books they've heard of, or whatever.
And that's a very different kind of business.
So I'm running two businesses at once, and I always have them.
Could you give me an idea, could you give some examples of some tiny collections that you've helped to go?
Yeah, I'll give you a perfect example of them.
It was about 1967 or so, I suppose.
I had a young friend, a woman in New York, who was starting a career as a journalist.
She works at the Times, but she, in those days, was sort of freelance writing articles.
New York Magazine had just started.
And so with my help, she did an article on the rare bookstores of New York.
Naturally, because I was telling her who all the stores were, I got a kind of free paragraph in it.
And it said in it that, among other things, that I was about 20 years younger than most of the other booksellers in New York.
In those days, there weren't young booksellers around.
There was a real age gap in the trade.
I think probably because of the war, World War II actually, it sort of created a gap, both in collectors and dealers.
I was in my 20s.
There were very few other rare booksellers under 50.
Anyway, the article said something like this.
A few months later, a guy came to the office, and I opened the door, and he said, he's clutching New York Magazine.
He said, you know, this says that you're easy to talk to.
I want to know, what is this collecting rare books anyway?
He said, I like to collect things.
I wasn't that busy in those days.
I sat him down, and we started talking.
It turned out he was a dermatologist in New Jersey.
He was not well-educated or anything, but he was a collector by nature.
He did like to collect them.
He collected stamps and anti-lock covers.
He had a full run of Playboy magazine.
But I don't know.
You'd sense that when you meet people like that, either they collect or they don't see the point of it.
The world divides into two kinds of people.
They're either collectors or they're not collectors.
I think if you're in the business, you can sort of spot this difference in about 30 seconds.
Anyway, this guy was a collector.
I think he bought a birthday present for his wife.
That's what happened.
I think that's what he came in for.
He wanted a birthday present for his wife, and I sold him a copy of Byron's Hebrew Melodies for something like 25 bucks, because it had the poem in it, She Walks in Beauty Like the Night.
The fact that his wife was short and fat didn't matter, but this served its purpose.
And he went away.
I didn't see him for a year.
He came back.
his wife's next birthday, and bought another book.
And we sort of got to talking.
It turned out we had a common interest in playing bridge.
And so we started to play duplicate bridge together.
And we became sort of serious bridge players.
We would go play in the summer nationals.
Oh, yeah.
And we got pretty good, actually.
We were doing that, and he kept sort of saying, well, why don't I collect books?
I know he was beginning to make a little more money now as he was working for a drug company.
He wasn't in private practice, but he liked that, and he saw what I was doing in the business, and it sort of appealed to him.
So I said, well, what do you want to collect, Jerry?
He said, I don't know.
I mean, I said, you want to collect dermatology?
He said, no, I don't think.
I said, well, that's good, because I don't know anything about dermatology books in any way.
Most of them are disgusting.
I mean, they show pictures of scabs.
So he said, you choose.
I said, well, okay.
I said, let's... I think I put it this way, probably.
I said, let's collect English poetry of the 19th century, starting with Wordsworth and ending with sort of early Yates.
And more or less what Jerry said was, who's Wordsworth and who's Yates?
I mean, he didn't know anything.
He had gone to pharmacy school or something.
From a very poor family, he worked his way up.
And he was a perfectly nice guy, but not educated in any sense, the academic sense.
But he said, OK, we'll collect that.
You choose the books and I'll pay for them.
And so we started.
I said, how much do you want to spend?
And he said, I think you could spend $1,000 a year.
So I said, okay, and you could buy books.
So we started collecting together.
Well, that collection is still going.
Okay.
Is it still building it?
Yeah.
Do you still like all the choices?
Jerry has never bought a book on his own.
I mean, he now will sometimes suggest things to him if he sees them in a Quaritch catalog.
And I think that you'd have to ask him, but I think that now, after almost 30 years, he has, of his suggestions, I think we've bought
I always say no.
Oh, you reserve the right to veto them.
I veto all of them.
But he now does know who Wordsworth and Pyron is.
I mean, he's not that interested in 19th century poetry, but he still loves collecting.
And the collection is the biggest thing in his life.
No, is this an American collection?
Yeah, it's in New Jersey.
Well, no, he's left his wife now.
He has a little apartment opposite Lincoln Center, and that's where the collection is.
But he's the treasurer of the Keats-Shelley Society.
Is his name anybody I know?
Jerry Wachs.
Wachs?
Yeah, he's in the Grolier.
I'll tell you what you think.
I did a Grolier exhibition of his collection.
the tape on the other side, yeah.